---
layout: post
title: Epilogue
date: 2016-01-30 01:14
comments: true
external-url:
categories: philosophy existentialism
---

*What if...*

> What and if, two words as nonthreatening as words come. But put them together side-by-side and they have the power to haunt you for the rest of your life: What if?...

Sixteen days have been passed since you've made the decision of leaving her. Yet, you still haven't gathered the courage to write down the exact words — or perhaps those that you *remember* — that were said during that afternoon. Probably because, once again, even if every fibre of your being knew that *that* was the only possible path, you kept *hope*, as always, that the world would show you things *could* be different. And, in that last breath of hope, you've let — you've *forced* — her to the one saying out loud what both knew to be the purpose of that meeting, that day, that conversation, that last embrace. There is no place for *pride* in the game of love, and the only way for you to approach that certainty you're looking for was, *once again*, to put in her hands the decision of both of your fates.

And since then those words hunt your days, your dreams, your unconscious mind. You recurrently ponder every hypothesis, every past decision were things could have been different. If at least, at *that* time, at *that* point, when *she said what she have said*, perhaps *you've* had reacted differently. If at least you've had tried to be more *understanding*, more *tolerant*, less *worried*, more *disconnected*... If you've had the courage, or the patience, of *giving time to time*...

That hateful sentence... That phrase that seems to be against everything that defines you, that defines what you've learned to *be* in these last decades, so against the human condition. *Time*, our worst enemy, simultaneously the source of our existence — no one exists as an *immutable being* — and our doom. In the words of Albert Camus:

> We live on the future: “tomorrow”, “later on”, “when you have made your way”, “you will understand when you are old enough”. Such irrelevancies are wonderful, for, after all, it’s a matter of dying. Yet a day comes when a man notices or says that he is thirty. Thus he asserts his youth. But simultaneously he situates himself in relation to time. He takes his place in it. He admits that he stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having to travel to its end. He belongs to time, and by the horror that seizes him, he recognises his worst enemy. Tomorrow, he was longing for tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it.

And yet, without time, there is no hope, since:

> A man devoid of hope and conscious of being so has ceased to belong to the future.

And from this realization, *aware* or not, your mind decided to do what it does best every single day: to *analyze* the situation, to *ponder* the alternatives, to *create* solutions, to *test* hypothesis; if the solution doesn't work, if the hypothesis is wrong, then one has to simply backtrack, to ponder where it went wrong, to look for the details that eluded us; because something eluded us... something *always* eludes us:

> Hope, it is the quintessential human delusion, simultaneously the source of your greatest strength, and your greatest weakness.

And if it really becomes necessary, then you scratch everything, you throw all away and start from the beginning! Yet another reaction that comes so easy for you; something that would scare so many people or be simply regarded as a complete waste. But not you; you never hesitate in throwing away hundreds of hours of work. Why? Because nothing is lost: nothing is *ever* lost! You *always* keep something... the experience of failing, the knowledge of what doesn't work, the intuition that lead you to join point A, with point B, with point C... *but that missed something along the path*; the frustration that keeps you moving, and the tenacity that there is no problem that cannot be solved... because the solution always existed — *somewhere* — and if it is currently out of your reach, it's because *you, and only you*, don't possess the *skill* to find it. The responsibility always felt down over the one and same person, and you've learned — or *today you choose* — that there's no gain in sharing it with others. You are, simultaneously, the victim, judge and executioner of your own failures.

And effectively, nothing is lost... your daily experimental laboratory is so free of effects, that trying, by the *sheer act* of merely trying, is such a common valid course of action that almost borders stupidity. So common that you've learned not to measure the consequences, to not deeply ponder about what may happen if you are proven wrong. You create the perfect testing environment, and isolate from the outside world any effect due to your guesses and intuitions. If you cannot rigorously calculate the solution to a problem, then you never hesitate to use that *amalgamation of experience* accumulated throughout the years, that *storm of electricity and chemistry* in your mind, that emerge, in the blink of an eye, *casuistically selected heuristics* due to those times were *they actually worked*; and if, epistemologically, you dedicate your life to the search of that *truth*, positivistic and *exact*, whatever works ninety percent of the time is more than *acceptable*.

And in that process you forget the role of chance, the uncontrollable variables, the scenarios where, by throwing the dice so *many times*, even the oddest and most improbable outcomes will eventually happen. You forget one of the effects that you know so well, that you reject so many times in your analysis, that always makes you doubt when things are too good to be true: *serendipity*... sometimes, the universe does seem to conspire in order to make improbable things happen. But you know that it's not a real *conspiration*; you know *nothing happens by chance*; and although you're also keenly aware that your understanding of that phrase if not the same as *poets* and *dreamers* have — that there is a *deliberate reason*, an *hidden driving force*, a *conscious agency* that *posits* the meaning of things — you are well acquainted with the fundamentals of mathematics and physics, of cause and effect, of the *meta-determinism* that exists in a quantic universe ruled by probabilistic laws, to know that *not even chance happens by chance*.

> And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and I feel its taste. These scents of grass and stars at night, certain evenings when the heart relaxes — how shall I negate this world whose power and strength I feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine. You describe it to me and you teach me to classify it. You enumerate its laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are true. You take apart its mechanism and my hope increases. At the final stage you teach me that this wondrous and multicolored universe can be reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the electron. All this is good and I wait for you to continue. But you tell me of an invisible planetary system in which electrons gravitate around a nucleus. You explain this world to me with an image. I realize then that you have been reduced to poetry: I shall never know.

But because it's in your nature to unveil those hidden variables, to seek the unknown *alpha* and *omega*; because you reject dissonance and ambivalence; because you do not accept what you can't understand, your mind wanders throughout those processes every night while you sleep; every moment while you decide to let go — where you *forget to keep?* - the control over your thoughts. And it wanders *always* to the same subject, the same events, the same person...

What you don't understand is that there is no possible control. There are no variables to be found. *There is no equation to solve*. Everything is too complex, too interconnected, too vast. Meaningless as you are, you wish to understand *universes inside universes*, and by sheer *arrogance*, you even think it to be possible.

*What if...*

But life isn't made of that stuff; because if you think carefully, if you observe yourself writing down this text, if you think in the long sequence of actions, in the chain of events that lead to the existence of tens of thousands of words dedicated to someone you hardly understood — someone that was probably nothing more that the *idealization* of your own mind — you'll see that *control* is a mere illusion, and any attempt to comprehend the incomprehensible, the neverending quest for the meaning of life and the sensations that make us happy, are themselves the ultimate acts that impede us from being so:

> Tu ne seras jamais heureux si tu continues à chercher en quoi consiste le bonheur. Et tu ne vivras jamais si tu recherches le sens de la vie. [^2]

[^2]: You will never be happy if you continue to search for what happiness consists of. You will never live if you are looking for the meaning of life.

What is then left to us, mere humans, also incapable of controlling that arrow of time dictated by entropy?...

*Choice...*

*The choice*, free of every and any illusion of consequence and meaning. We are not able to control the world or the people that surround us. We cannot bend reality to our own will. But we are — *we believe to be?* — able to choose.

> La vie est la somme de tous vos choix. [^3]

[^3]: Life is the sum of all your choices.

And so you did it: in each moment, in each feeling of pain and joy, of anguish and hope, of frustration or happiness, you made a choice. Would you believe in *free will*, and you would be questioning if they were *the right choices*. But you know very well that's just another illusion; an illusion that you decided to rebel since childhood, but an illusion *nonetheless*. And so you realize that your only possible choices, given who you were and the information you had at those particular moments, were, precisely, the ones you took. It doesn't matter if you were wrong or right; all it matters is that, would everything happen again, you would have the exact same thing, just like a movie being projected the umpteenth time over a screen.

> Then Sisyphus watches the stone rush down in a few moments toward that lower world whence he will have to push it up again toward the summit. He goes back down to the plain. It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the torment of which he will never know the end. That hour like a breathing-space which returns as surely as his suffering, that is the hour of consciousness. At each of those moments when he leaves the heights and gradually sinks towards the lair of the gods, he is superior to his fate. He is stronger than his rock.

And you obviously rebel yourself against that... Another action that only an *absurdist* could take. You revolt against the inevitable, against the unavoidable, against the incomprehensible... You revolt against yourself. You find irritating that every — *every* — single morning you awake, the first thought you have once you gain conscience is always — *always* — the same: she. You revolt against yourself every time the phone rings, every time you receive a message, every time you open *Facebook*... You revolt against yourself by the absurdity of the situation, for rationally knowing there is only one path to take — only one *choice* to make — and that any other alternative you might ponder is doomed to fail because *you are not in the control of the situation*. You aren't, you never were, and you will never be. You are not *supposed* to. It is not even something *desirable*.

You revolt because your life is all about solving equations and ***she's not and equation that you can solve. She's not an expression that you can understand; pages that you can scrutinize; symbols that you can unveil or a lexicum that you can learn. She's a whole world, with her mountains and valleys; her rivers and oceans; her continents and islands; her secrets and mysteries. A world with its various languages, and alphabets, and books, and histories, and characters, and*** **endless dreams** ***kept within*** **herself**.

And *you* are another one of those worlds...

Two planets; *two bodies* that approached each other, whose gravity mutually influenced your own trajectory, that made you dance in elliptic curves around a common axis, facing one another, in rapid tangential movements of angular acceleration due to the sheer amount of mass that comprises your beings. But whose origins, whose path, whose genesis of your own structure, your own *momentum*, partially dictated even before you were both born, was too strong for those brief moments where *nothing else existed* besides you.

And that now depart from each other, due to the action of the exact same force that once attracted you... perhaps still looking onto one another, taking with you whatever both *choose* to take. While one of you, unable of forgetting all the wonders that were seen and felt in such a different, such fascinating, such strange but simultaneously such familiar world, forever revolted by the *unshakeable laws of nature*, ponder:

*What if...*
